---
layout: post
title: The Rings in Ring Learning with Errors
tags: rings rlwe sage
published: true
---

Ring learning with errors (RLWE) is a hard cryptographic problem that shows up in fully homomorphic encryption (FHE). Like the discrete log problem or integer factorization, the hardness of RLWE makes it useful for cryptographic applications like FHE, the common thing among these problems being that it's computationally hard to "undo" certain kinds of calculations. An FHE encryption scheme is basically one with encyption and decryption functions $$E_{pk}$$ and $$D_{sk}$$ ($$(pk, sk)$$ are a public key/private key pair as in any asymmetric cryptographic protocol) where plaintext and ciphertext spaces are [*rings*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_(mathematics)), and $$E_{pk}$$ and $$D_{sk}$$ are [*ring homomorphisms*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_homomorphism). I'm not going to go much more in depth in RWLE or FHE in this post, maybe that's for another day, but for now I'd like to focus on what the rings are that are used in RLWE.

In RLWE we work with plaintext and ciphertext spaces of the form $$R = \mathbb{Z}_p [x] / (f(x))$$ where $$p$$ is prime and $$f$$ is an irreducible polynomial. Since $$p$$ is prime, $$\mathbb{Z}_p$$ is actually a (finite, or Galois) field and is sometimes written as $$\mathbb{F}_p$$ to emphasize the fact that we can divide elements by other elements. Since $$R$$ is constructed by taking a quotient of $$\mathbb{Z}_p[x]$$ by the ideal generated by a polynomial $$f$$, $$R$$ must be a finite ring. This is because any element of $$R$$ can be written in the form $$a_0 + a_1x + \cdots + a_{d-1}x^{d-1}$$, where $$d$$ is the degree of $$f$$. Any terms of degree higher than $$d$$ can be rewritten as a sum of lower degree ($$<d$$) terms, since in $$R$$, $$f(x) = 0$$. And since $$a_i \in \mathbb{Z}_p$$, which is finite and of size $$p$$, $$R$$ has at most $$p^d$$ elements, or $$\vert R\vert \le p^d < \infty$$. So $$R$$ is a finite ring.

In fact, $$R$$ must have exactly $$p^d$$ elements, since each tuple of coefficients $$(a_0, \ldots, a_{n-1})$$ *uniquely* represents an element in $$R$$. To see why, assume this isn't true. Then there would be tuples $$(a_0, \ldots, a_{n-1}) \ne (b_0, \ldots, b_{n-1})$$ that both represent the same element in $$R$$. If we define $$c_i = a_i - b_i$$, then $$(c_0, \ldots, c_{n-1})$$ would represent the zero polynomial, or $$0 \in R$$. But for this to be so, the polynomial $$g(x) = c_0 + \cdots + c_{n-1}x^{n-1}$$ would have to be an element of the (principal) ideal $$(f(x))$$, meaning it would have to be a polynomial multiple of $$f(x)$$, or $$g = hf$$ for some $$h \in \mathbb{Z}_p[x]$$. But since $$\mathbb{Z}_p$$ is a field (and therefore has no zero divisors), the degree of $$g$$ is equal to the [sum of degrees of $$h$$ and $$f$$](https://proofwiki.org/wiki/Degree_of_Product_of_Polynomials_over_Ring). But this is impossible since $$\deg(f) > \deg(g)$$, so such a $$g$$ cannot exist. We can conclude that $$\vert R \vert = p^d$$.

We can use a computer algebra system (CAS) to verify this is true for lots of small examples. It's not a proof, larger counterexamples like Graham's number do exist, but it's still satisfying to see in my opinion. I originally wanted to use Macaulay2 to carry out this calculation, since this is what I had learned when taking commutative algebra in college, but after researching other CASes it seems like SageMath is much more powerful, so I went with that. Sage is a CAS that's tightly integrated with Python, which makes it really appealing to use and learn. If you're on macOS like I am, I wouldn't recommend installing Sage by downloading from their website, but from this [homebrew cask](https://formulae.brew.sh/cask/sage) (via `brew install --cask sage`). Here's a short Sage program I wrote that defines $$R$$ using the [cyclotomic polynomials](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/CyclotomicPolynomial.html) (a particular kind of irreducible polynomial), computes its cardinality, and checks it's equal to $$p^d$$:

{% highlight python %}
# iterate over primes
for i, p in enumerate(Primes()):
    # iterate over cyclotomics
    for n in range(1, i+1):
        # GF(p) is the finite field of order p
        S = PolynomialRing(GF(p), 'x')
        f = cyclotomic_polynomial(n)
        R = QuotientRing(S, f)

        # this is the check
        assert R.cardinality() == p ** (f.degree())
        print(f"Checked equality for p == {p}, n == {n}")
{% endhighlight %}

This code will run forever since it's always true that $$\vert R \vert = p^d$$, as I just proved above without any fancy computers. As you can see, Sage code looks a lot like Python code (see GitHub gist [here](https://gist.github.com/vhxs/42c630ae623bf1459d6a2b62596104b2), runnable from command line with `sage check_rlwe_ring_order.sage`). Also, this code runs impressivly fast, going through primes less than a thousand in about 15 seconds on my laptop. I think it's [Grobner bases](https://www.ams.org/notices/200510/what-is.pdf) and their related algorithms that enable such speed, but that's a rabbit hole to explore later on.

Seeing that the cardinality of $$R$$ is always a prime power made me wonder whether $$R$$ is always a field, since [the cardinality of any finite field is also a prime power](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/72856/order-of-finite-fields-is-pn). Is division always possible in such $$R$$?

Turns out no, and I'm going to use Sage to prove it, this time to find a counterexample. Sage has a convenient `is_field` function that's a method of any `Ring` object:

{% highlight python %}
for i, p in enumerate(Primes()):
    for n in range(1, i+1):
        S = PolynomialRing(GF(p), 'x')
        f = cyclotomic_polynomial(n)
        R = QuotientRing(S, f)

        if not R.is_field():
            print(f"GF({p}) / ({f}) is not a field!!")
            quit()
{% endhighlight %}

If you run the above ([gist](https://gist.github.com/vhxs/9e6aeacf351ac65c3cbba61333aebdba)), Sage will immediately yell at you with:

{% highlight shell%}
username@hostname ~ % sage rlwe_rings_are_not_fields.sage
GF(7) / (x^2 + x + 1) is not a field!!
{% endhighlight %}

That means $$\mathbb{Z}_7[x] / (x^2 + x + 1)$$ isn't a field!! In particular, $$x + 3$$ has no inverse, as Sage shows by running this code:

{% highlight python%}
R = PolynomialRing(GF(7), 'x').quo(cyclotomic_polynomial(3))
for elt in R:
    if elt != 0 and not elt.is_unit():
        print(f"{elt} has no inverse")
        quit()
{% endhighlight %}

But if you recall your basic abstract algebra, you'll remember that 
1. Polynomial rings over fields are principal ideal domains (PID), 
2. an ideal in a PID generated by an irreducible element is a maximal ideal, and 
3. the quotient of a ring by a maximal ideal produces a field.

So as a cyclotomic polynomial, $$x^2 + x + 1$$ generates a maximal ideal of $$\mathbb{Z}_7[x]$$, so $$\mathbb{Z}_7 [x] / (x^2 + x + 1)$$ should be a field, but Sage claims it isn't, so what gives??? Factorization of $$x^2 + x + 1$$ over $$\mathbb{Z}_7$$ with WolframAlpha: [link](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input?i=factor+x%5E2+%2B+x+%2B+1+over+GF%287%29)

I was very confused about this specific point until I remembered that irreducibility is defined *relative to a particular ring*, and that the chosen ring matters. Simple example: you learn in high school that $$x^2 + 1$$ doesn't factor over $$\mathbb{R}$$, so is irreducible over $$\mathbb{R}$$, but it [*does* factor](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input?i=factor+x%5E2%2B1) over $$\mathbb{C}$$ as $$x^2 + 1 = (x + i)(x - i)$$.

[This crypto stackexchange thread](https://crypto.stackexchange.com/questions/40272/irreducible-polynomial-in-ring-lwe) points out that $$x^4 + 1$$ actually factors completely over $$\mathbb{Z}_{17}[x]$$ as $$(x+2)(x+8)(x+9)(x+15)$$.

Apparently, the ring used in RLWE only requires that $$f(x)$$ should be irreducible over $$\mathbb{Q}$$, but not necessarily over $$\mathbb{Z}_p$$. Why irreduciblity over $$\mathbb{Q}$$ only is sufficient for RLWE to work is still a mystery to me, but maybe it'll become more clear to me as I study more about RLWE and FHE in general.

Irreducibility is, in general, hard to prove about arbitrary polynomials. There are a few different irreducibility criteria that you learn about when taking algebra courses, but there are polynomials that can fail all criteria and yet still be irreducible (challenge: can I actaully find an example). Here are a few criteria:
- [Eisenstein's criterion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eisenstein%27s_criterion)
- [Cohn's criterion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cohn%27s_irreducibility_criterion)
- [Perron's criterion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perron%27s_irreducibility_criterion)

Final thoughts before I stop here: as we observed, there are finite rings that have cardinality which is a prime power (eg $$p^d$$), but fail to be fields since they have non-invertible elements, so we can't do division. One other property of finite fields is that [their multiplicative groups are cyclic](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/59903/finite-subgroups-of-the-multiplicative-group-of-a-field-are-cyclic), so finite rings that aren't fields probably don't have cyclic multiplicative groups ([or might they?](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2373134)). Using Sage, we can compute that $$\mathbb{Z}_7 [x] / (x^2 + x + 1)$$ has $$13$$ non-units, so its multiplicative group is of order $$49 - 13 = 36$$. Up to isomorphism, [there are four Abelian groups of order $$36$$](https://groupprops.subwiki.org/wiki/Groups_of_order_36), so $$(\mathbb{Z}_7 [x]/ (x^2 + x + 1))^*$$ must be one of them. Makes me wonder which Abelian groups are multiplicative groups of any finite ring $$R$$. Answering this question must be wildly difficult.