---
layout: post
title: Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange for Mathematicians
date:   2022-01-09
tags: cryptography, math
published: true
katex: True
---

As someone with a math/cs background, I find cryptography fascinating since it's a real-world application of interesting math. Cryptographic protocols are used in blockchains, digital signatures, encryption of wireless networks, establishing secure connections, and lots of other things. If you're like me, concepts stick a lot easier when they're presented in math-speak. Diffie-Hellman key exchange is one cryptographic protocol that I think is fairly easy to comprehend if you understand the algebra behind it.

Diffie-Hellman is a cryptographic protocol used by two parties for key exchange. Except I think that "key exchange" is a misnomer, since there isn't actually a key that's being transmitted from one party to another. The two parties instead cooperatively generate a shared secret by exchanging certain information.

As is typical in cryptography, assume we have two parties Alice and Bob, and suppose they agree on a finite cyclic group $$\mathbb{Z}_n$$ along with a generator $$g \in \mathbb{Z}_n$$. Alice and Bob can communicate over an insecure channel whose message can be read by adversary Eve, and begin the protocol by choosing random integers $$0 <= a, b < n$$, respectively. Then they multiply $$g$$ by these random integers to get $$ag$$ and $$bg$$. They then send $$ag$$ and $$bg$$ to the other party over the shared channel. Alice receives $$bg$$ from Bob and computes $$a(bg)$$ as her secret key, while Bob receives $$ag$$ from Alice and computes $$b(ag)$$ as his secret key. And since $$a(bg) = b(ag) = abg$$, Alice and Bob actual generate the same key. This is the shared secret key generated by Diffie-Hellman.

That's all there is to it. The protocol assumes that Eve knows $$g \in \mathbb{Z}_n$$, and that Eve can also learn $$ag$$ and $$bg$$ by eavesdropping on communication between Alice and Bob, but even with this information computing $$a$$ or $$b$$ is still hard for Eve. This is because Eve has to solve the [discrete log problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discrete_logarithm#Cryptography). All Eve sees are two random elements $$h, h' \in \mathbb{Z}_n$$, and knows $$g$$, so she must solve the equations $$h = xg$$ and $$h' = yg$$ to learn the generated secret. Cryptography works because of known hardness proofs, or strong evidence that certain problems are hard to solve, and the discrete log problem is *believed* to be a hard problem (though researchers don't seem to actually *know* much about [its hardness](https://cs.stackexchange.com/questions/113124/is-discrete-log-a-np-hard-problem){:target="_blank"}).

Here's a quick implementation in Python, where Bob runs a TCP server in one thread[^1], and Alice a client in another thread, and Alice chooses $$\mathbb{Z}_{100}$$ and $$3$$ as a generator send to Bob. 

{% highlight python %}
import threading
import socket
import random

def alice():
    print("alice work up!")

    attempts = 0
    while attempts < 5:
        try:
            conn = socket.create_connection(('127.0.0.1', 1337))
            break
        except:
            attempts += 1
    if attempts >= 5:
        print("bob not found!")

    modulus = 100
    generator = 3
    conn.sendall(bytes(f"{modulus},{generator}", "utf-8"))

    a = random.randrange(modulus)
    g_a = a * generator

    conn.sendall(bytes(f"{g_a}", "utf-8"))
    from_bob = conn.recv(1024)

    secret = a * int(from_bob.decode("utf-8"))
    print(f"alice's secret: {secret}")

    conn.close()

def bob():
    print("bob woke up!")

    sock = socket.create_server(('127.0.0.1', 1337))
    conn, _ = sock.accept()

    group_with_elt = conn.recv(1024)
    modulus, generator = map(int, group_with_elt.decode("utf-8").split(","))

    b = random.randrange(modulus)
    g_b = b * generator

    conn.sendall(bytes(f"{g_b}", "utf-8"))
    from_alice = conn.recv(1024)

    secret = b * int(from_alice.decode("utf-8"))
    print(f"bob's secret: {secret}")

    sock.close()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    run_alice = threading.Thread(target=alice)
    run_bob = threading.Thread(target=bob)

    run_alice.start()
    run_bob.start()
{% endhighlight %}

Interestingly, a slight variation of Diffie-Hellman can also be used as a public-key infrastructure. Alice chooses $$\mathbb{Z_n}$$ and $$g$$ as before, chooses a random $$0 <= a < n$$ as her secret key, and broadcasts $$(ag, \mathbb{Z_n}, g)$$ as her public key. If Bob wants to send an encrypted message $$m$$ meant for Alice, then as in Diffie-Hellman, he chooses a random $$0 <= b < n$$, computes $$abg$$ using $$ag$$ and $$b$$, and uses $$abg$$ as a *symmetric* key to create an encrypted message $$c$$. Bob sends $$c$$ together with $$bg$$ to Alice. Alice can recover the symmetric key using her secret key $$a$$ and $$bg$$ received from Bob, and using the symmetric key $$abg$$, can decrypt $$c$$ to recover $$m$$.

[^1]: Not a perfect implementation due to how `sendall` and `recv` work, sometimes errors if the two threads' executions aren't interleaved correctly, but it's good enough for me.