---
layout: post
title: Go notes
date:   2022-01-10
tags: golang, notes
published: true
---

Updating this incrementally as I learn the quirks and ins and outs of Go

- First introduced publicly in 2012 by Google, so it's been around for some time. Another attempt at introducing a systems language alternative to C++. Though C++ is probably very entrenched in legacy systems and codebases, Go (and Rust) will eventually catch on because of who they're backed by.
- New systems being built using Go. This includes blockchains like Avalance, Algorand, and Ethereum. They all have popular clients implemented in Go
- Go by example seems like a useful reference to learn how to do all the basic stuff you'd want to when learning a new programming language: https://gobyexample.com/
- Start here if you want to build anything more complex than just "hello world": https://go.dev/doc/code. Really, otherwise your code will end up a mess.
- Run Go code on a online REPL so you don't have to build a binary each time you want to run a code snippet https://go.dev/play/
- Go only has `for` loops? So to write a `while (true) {...` loop in Go, we write `for {...`. Not very intuitive, but I guess it's more succinct?
- Like in C, structs are a thing in Go
- Functions can have multiple return values, so no need to throw everything in a single struct if you need to return more than one thing
- No try/catch/except. Instead, use multiple return, returning a value as well as an error. Error is the last return value
- Arrays and slices. Slices is an odd name since I think of Python slices, but that's not really what they are at all. Arrays have a fixed length (this is *part* of variable typing), while slices do not. Difference in type annotation of arrays vs slices is only the constant that used to specify an array's length
- There's some kind of case sensitivity when naming functions: functions exported from a package must start with an upper case letter.